docs: add EDR for deterministic simulation testing (#328)
pragma-org/amaru: engineering-decision-records/011-deterministic-simulation-testing.md

One of the main contributing factors to the problem of testing is that there
are so many failure modes, which results in a combinatorial explosion of states
and test cases that need to be written to ensure proper coverage.

Even when one finds a failing test case, the problem of debugging is
complicated by the parallel nature of a network of nodes. The same test cases
might not fail deterministically, because some bugs are only triggered in some
interleaving of threads that only happen rarely.

## Motivation

The state-of-the-art to deal with the testing problem is to generate test
cases which includes fault injection and "fuzz" a whole network of nodes.

While the debugging problem can be tamed by making the system under test and
the fuzzer completely deterministic, that way if we find a failure we can
deterministically reproduce it from some seed.

## Decision

In order to tackle the problem of testing and debugging we've introduced two
changes:

  1. Introduced a library, called pure-stage, for building parallel processing
     networks that can be run in a completely deterministic fashion. The idea
     being that the consensus pipeline will be ported from using gasket (which

>      wasn't designed with determinism in mind) to pure-stage;

Reviewer: I’d reformulate that the whole node-internal processing network will be expressed using pure-stage. Whether that covers the so-called consensus (which is a bit of a misnomer if you ask me, since eventual consensus is only one of the desirable outcomes of running these modules) or something else is not so important.

  when a future becomes available;

* Time skews (the clock of nodes drifts a part). The simulator controls the
  clock of the nodes, via pure-stage's API, so skews can be implemented by
  advancing some node's clocks more than others;

* Disk failures (since all of our stable storage is delegated to RocksDB we
  inherit its storage failure model). To test this the simulator can inject the
  following disk faults on nodes:
    - Delete the whole database;
    - Flip bits in the database;
    - Truncate the write-ahead-log of the database (to simulate a crash where
      the last entry wasn't fully fsynced to disk). For more details, see
      [Protocol-Aware Recovery for Consensus-Based Distributed
      Storage](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3241062).

#### Byzantine faults

The space of possibilities here is infinite. Any combination of changing any
message or any piece of state on a faulty node is allowed. Although the
protocol, with its use of cryptographically secure hashes, should render all of
these attacks useless, nevertheless this needs to be tested to some extent.

As a first approximation one could have the simulator mutate messages between

> or the stable storage of a node to ensure that hashes are checked.

Reviewer: Makes sense to me, we should test that corruption is indeed recognised and rejected in all parts of the system.

Coordinated attacks that explore the extremes of protocol parameters and timings
of messages is out of scope of this decision. Let us just note there's the
possibility to add Byzantine (malicious) nodes to the simulation test and
otherwise run the tests as before, and ensure that the non-faulty nodes still

> work as intended.

Reviewer: One interesting angle could be to challenge the community to contribute node implementations that deviate in interesting ways, with some bounty for catching interesting edge cases. We aren’t there yet, though.

     networks that can be run in a completely deterministic fashion. The idea
     being that the consensus pipeline will be ported from using gasket (which
     wasn't designed with determinism in mind) to pure-stage;

  2. A discrete-event simulator which spawns a network of nodes and simulates
     the network connections between them. The simulator decides when, or if,
     messages get delivered to the nodes and can step through the execution
     deterministically using the pure-stage API.

## Discussion points

Apart from the goal of determinism, the design of the pure-stage library and
the simulator were mainly driven by the following considerations.

### Pipelined architecture

One complication to both making the node deterministic and simulation testing
it is the fact that the processing of incoming messages happens in a parallel
pipeline. So the trick of implementing the system as a state machine of type:

  (input, state) -> (output, state)

doesn't quite work. One rather needs to implement it as several state machines
(that can run in parallel) connected with queues. Further complications arise

> due to the fact that the different stages in the pipeline share state (or one
> stage needs to be able to send messages to another to update the other copy of
> the state).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
due to the fact that the different stages in the pipeline share external state (e.g.
the contents of a persistent storage for blocks, headers, tips). Here, the design
goal for the concrete stages should be that updates to some entity be made by
only one stage and messages to other stages carry the knowledge about what
has been written and can thus be read. This is aided by the append-only nature
of the content-addressed storage items used within a blockchain node.
```

if one event is "there's a partition between node A and B", followed by events
trying to deliever messages between A and B, then those messages will timeout
immediately (unlike if we do Jepsen-style system tests where we have to wait
for the timeouts to happen in real-time).

Since the pure-stage library allows for modelling several connected stages that
might share memory, one cannot simply assume that the processing of one message
is a discrete event that produces output messages instantly. So the simulator
needs to not only orchestrate the network, but also the thread scheduler so to
say.

Here's a sketch of the algorithm for the simulator:

 1. Ask all nodes when the next interesting point in time is;

 2. Pop world heap to figure out which message to deliever next;

 3. If there are no interesting times from step 1 or they all happen after the
    next message is supposed to be delivered, then advance the time to the
    arrival time of the message on all nodes and deliver the popped message.

    Otherwise put all the interesting times into the world heap and recurse.
    (We need to make it so that if we ask for the next interesting points in

>     time in step 1, the nodes returns an empty list?)

Reviewer: Hmm, maybe the coffee isn’t yet working: this description seems more complicated than it needs to be. How about

1. the simulation heap starts out with external input messages, each paired with an arrival time and a target node
2. each node is polled for the next time at which something would occur internally; the node is also inserted into the simulation heap with that time
3. the simulator pops the task with the smallest time from the heap (message delivery or internal node action) and performs it; this may enqueue messages for other nodes that cause them to be woken up sooner than dictated by their current position in the heap — if so, remove and re-insert
4. that node is then queried for the next interesting time and inserted back into the heap with that time
5. the simulator starts over from 3 (unless some stop condition is satisfied)

So the API should be something like:

```
  handle : ArrivalTime -> Message -> NextArrivalTime -> Vec<Message>
  nextInteresting : Time
  advanceTime : Time -> Vec<Message>
```

Where `NextArrivalTime` is when the next message (after the one we just popped)
arrives, the idea being that the node we are currently stepping is free to run
all its yield points until that time (since nothing interesting is happining in
the world until then anyway).

### Maximising the overlap of what's being tested vs deployed

We want the simulator to be as true to the "real world" as possible. Ideally
any failure that could happen in a real world deployment should be reproducible
within the simulator (and any failure to do so should be considered a bug in
the simulator), but of course one has to draw a line somewhere.

To achieve this the pure-stage library has a runtime interface that can be

> toggled between being deterministic or to use tokio.

Reviewer: I think this doesn’t belong here: we’re discussing fault injection in the simulator, which is independent of the Tokio implementation.

Reviewer: Yes, we agree on this; my suggestion was to move this aspect from this isolated single sentence into its own section for a deeper discussion (which I added at the end of the text).

of messages is out of scope of this decision. Let us just note there's the
possibility to add Byzantine (malicious) nodes to the simulation test and
otherwise run the tests as before, and ensure that the non-faulty nodes still
work as intended.

It should also be noted that this space contains admin mistakes, such as
misconfigurations of node, computer or network settings. We've not thought
about how to simulate these type of faults yet.

### Membership changes and upgrades

Testing how the system behaves as nodes leave and join, potentially with a
different version of the software, is also important as there could be
backward- and forward-compatibility problems between the version.

While we've not put much thought into this yet, the simulator has been designed
in such a way that it can communicate with the nodes via stdin/stdout a la
Jepsen's Maelstrom, which means we could technically run different versions of
the node binaries (this would be slower than the default in-process tests).

### Test case generation

Due to the consensus protocol's requirement that all messages need to be hashed
and refer to the previous message's hash (i.e. hash-chained), it's not possible

> to generate "random" traffic as one normally would with property-based testing.

Reviewer: It sure isn’t straight-forward and the libraries aren’t made for this, meaning it will be inconvenient, but the “not possible” part of the statement is incorrect. It is a matter of generating test inputs that then are used to compute a resulting block tree with the correct hashes, e.g. using an integer to point to a previous block (using modulo arithmetic to adequately “shorten” it).

diffs of how the state of the nodes changes upon receiving messages.

### Antithesis

One might wonder: why bother with all this when we are using Antithesis paid
SaaS to do simulation testing already?

Some differences that may or may not motivate the double effort:

1. The effort to introduce deterministic simulation tests was started before
   Antithesis was approached, and we knew it would be a good tool or a budget
   for it;

2. The Antithesis tests take on the order of hours to run, whereas the simulation
   tests described above take seconds to run. The immediate feedback makes it
   possible to use the tests during development as a sanity check;

3. Antithesis doesn't support for example disk faults currently;

4. Good system architecture and being easy to test locally (i.e. with `cargo
   test`) goes hand in hand. The efforts described above leads to for example
   being able to write a unit test for a regression test involving a whole network
   of nodes and faults, which is something that would not been possible if the
   system had not been made deterministic (and solely relied on Antithesis for

>    determinism).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   determinism).

## Relation to Production Mode

The above description focuses on a special mode of execution for the pure-stage infrastructure that
allows us to deterministically run a whole network while precisely following what each node is doing.
This mode is single-threaded by definition due to the ordering guarantees it needs to make.
When running an Amaru node in production, the very same pure-stage components are used with a
non-deterministic execution engine that allows for parallelism, namely the Tokio runtime. The idea
here is that simulation testing should eventually exhaust all possible interleavings of messages and
other effects, thus covering the range of possible behaviours of the Tokio implementation.

We still want to be able to diagnose, reproduce, and correct any runtime failures observed during
production mode. This is why all relevant effects (which include message reception but also the
results of external effects like reading the clock or accessing disk storage) are recorded in a trace
that can then be taken to an offline system and be replayed. This requires that the offline system has
been primed with a suitable starting state (disk storage as well as stage state) because the trace
will usually be truncated (e.g. by recording to an in-memory ring buffer that overwrites old entries).
Care has been taken to ensure that all relevant state can be snapshotted and stored periodically,
making it possible to recreate the exact runtime state of an Amaru node from the youngest snapshot
and the trace written since.

Due to the true parallelism available in production mode it is impossible to recreate the exact
temporal evolution of a node’s state when replaying a trace. When focusing on a single stage
the result is exact, though, because a stage only processes inputs sequentially due to its state
machine signature. We can thus envision a time travelling debugger for a single stage, with a
bit of fuzz regarding the execution order between different stages.
```
